## Introduction

The exemplarity of a project, in terms of design, is complex to assess due to the overlap of many
issues, problems and needs in cities like Montreal. Several guides, such as the
[The Davos Baukultur Quality System](https://www.bak.admin.ch/bak/en/home/baukultur/qualitaet/davos-qualitaetssystem-baukultur.html)
and the
[Agenda montréalais 2030 pour la qualité et l'exemplarité en design et en architecture](https://designmontreal.com/sites/designmontreal.com/files/publications/agenda_mtl_2030_v1.12-19_fr_lr.pdf),
have been produced to guide professionals, citizens and elected officials towards more positive
projects for the community, and have inspired the writing of the Nplex Project Exemplarity Guide,
which aims to provide the reader with guidelines specific to the Montreal territory and the type of
project targeted by the platform. This guide explores project exemplarity in eight dimensions:
sustainability, resilience, moderation of energy consumption, economic optimization, attractiveness
and cultural enhancement, innovation, equity and inclusiveness, and well-being.

## Sustainability

A sustainable project simultaneously takes into account the social, environmental and economic
dimensions of the project. A project that lasts over time reduces resource consumption and
greenhouse gas emissions (DAVOS 8 criteria, p. 29). Renovating rather than rebuilding quality built
environments also helps preserve the affective, cultural and heritage value of a site (DAVOS 8
criteria, p. 24). Construction and deconstruction waste can be reused or recycled (DAVOS 8 criteria,
p. 32).

Furthermore, a sustainable project is flexible, i.e. it can be easily adapted to different
functions, audiences and climatic conditions (DAVOS 8 criteria, p. 23). The project's flexibility
can be deployed on a daily basis, through the seasons or over several years.

## Resilience

A resilient project takes into account climatic hazards and climate change over the long term, and
provides adaptation measures. Such measures are achieved, among other things, through the choice of
materials, technology and the integration of green infrastructure (Agenda Mtl, p. 46). The project
must be able to withstand the extreme climatic conditions projected for the area, as well as
everyday problems.

For example, the project must be capable of capturing and absorbing run-off water, with green
infrastructure such as retention basins or permeable paving. Vegetation and the reduction of paved
surfaces enable the community to build resilience to heat waves. Other strategies include the
presence of shaded areas, fountains or misters, and the selection of pale pavers, offering high
solar reflectance.

The project is also intended to build social resilience, by facilitating access to services in times
of crisis, for instance (Agenda Mtl, p. 46). The project enables people to come together, inform
themselves and mobilize to become resilient to social, cultural and natural changes, with a
particular focus on vulnerable communities and individuals.

## Moderating energy consumption

In order to reduce energy consumption, materials' lifecycle must be studied, from extraction to
end-of-life (DAVOS 8 criteria, p. 29). Locally sourced materials are preferred to reduce
transport-related emissions. Energy-efficient construction techniques can reduce the project's
energy consumption.

Then, the energy required for maintenance and to make the site comfortable in terms of temperature
and humidity can be minimized by optimizing the impact of natural light, solar heat and heat
redistribution networks (Agenda Mtl, p. 39).

## Economic optimization

The contribution to the regional economy, measured by the creation of housing, jobs or services,
must be supported by a reduction in construction and maintenance costs, taking into account the
project's life cycle (DAVOS 8 criteria, p. 35). The growth generated by the investment must take
into account issues such as gentrification and the rising cost of living, in order to promote the
long-term economic viability of the project (DAVOS 8 criteria, p. 32). It must also aim to meet
current and projected needs, and promote a sufficiency-based approach (DAVOS 8 criteria, p. 33).
Finally, the use of subsidy programs is an economic optimization player to be considered when
evaluating projects.

## Attractiveness and cultural enhancement

A project's attractiveness is influenced by factors such as aesthetics, cultural identity, history
and ambiance, all of which are subjective (Agenda Mtl, p. 43). In addition, a project's integration
into the urban, natural and cultural landscape enables it to be in dialogue with its surroundings,
and the resulting spatial coherence adds value to the project (DAVOS 8 criteria, p. 38). An
attractive project is one that enhances the history of the site, allowing the traces of its past to
be recognized and preserved, so that the identity value associated with the site endures (DAVOS 8
criteria, p. 40).

## Innovation

Innovation allows creativity to express itself through design, encouraging the sharing of knowledge
and ideas (Agenda Mtl, p. 31). Innovative governance practices and new technologies can be
significantly integrated into the project. Finally, involving the next generation in the project can
stimulate innovation.

## Equity and inclusion

An inclusive project promotes mixed use and the inclusion of people of different ages, ethnicities,
cultures, sexual orientations and genders, while being accessible to people with disabilities. The
project enables these people to come together in the same place, to feel safe and to be treated
fairly (DAVOS 8 criteria, p. 35). Accommodation and inclusion measures are put in place to promote
fair treatment for all, in order to foster social cohesion (Agenda Mtl, p. 38).

## Wellness

Well-being is a broad component, encompassing notions of health, safety, mental health and healthy
lifestyles. Ambient noise must also be reduced, to preserve hearing and reduce stress. Contact with
natural elements such as sunlight, plants, animals and watercourses also promotes well-being.
Finally, a place that encourages healthy lifestyle habits, such as physical exercise, relaxation and
healthy eating, promotes well-being (Agenda Mtl, p. 36).

## Conclusion

This guide reflects the diversity of ways in which a project can be exemplary. Eight aspects have
been explored: sustainability, resilience, moderation of energy consumption, economic optimization,
attractiveness and cultural enhancement, innovation, equity and inclusiveness, and well-being. The
exemplarity of a project is not judged by the number of criteria it ticks, but by the way these
criteria interact to form a coherent whole. The many examples presented are also a reminder of the
uniqueness of each project. It is through a thorough understanding of these aspects that a project
can strive to be exemplary.
